==== Back to QGis: Georeferencing ====
*<+-> Georeferencing involves transforming an image into a map  
**<+-> assigning geographic coordinates to each pixel in the image  
*<+-> To achieve this, match points on the image with corresponding locations on an accurate reference raster (e.g., OSM)  
*<+-> A georeferencing tool then calculates the coordinates for all pixels  
**<+-> Accuracy improves with the number of reference points  
**<+-> The image may need morphing (non-linear transformation)  
**<+-> Optimal reference points are distant and non-aligned    
*<+-> QGIS provides tools for this task  

==== Georeferencing: Preparation ====
*<+-> Create a new project and load the reference raster (OSM)  
*<+-> Adjust the scale to match the area covered in the map  
*<+-> Observe the code in the bottom right corner: !EPSG:3857 (WGS84/Pseudo-Mercator)!  
**<+-> This is the usual projection for Web mapping  
*<+-> Open the Georeferencer tool:  
**<+-> Select !Layer! -> !Georeferencer...! to open a new window  
*<+-> In the ''Georeferencer'' window:  
**<+-> Select !File! -> !Open Raster!  
**<+-> Locate and open the image file you want to georeference

==== Unreferenced image loaded ====
\begin{center}  
<<<../images/QGis_georeference1.png, width=\textwidth>>>  
\end{center}

==== Setup the transformation type ====
*<+-> Configure transformation settings:  
**<+-> Select !Settings! -> !Transformation Settings!  
**<+-> Choose a transformation type (TPS is generally suitable)  
**<+-> Ensure the SRS is set to EPSG:3857 - WGS84/Pseudo-Mercator  
**<+-> Specify a target file for the result  
**<+-> Enable "Load in QGIS when done"  
**<+-> Click OK to apply the settings and return to the Georeferencer window  

==== Matching Points ====
*<+-> Repeat the following steps for at least three (distant, non-aligned) points on your map image:  
**<+-> Identify a recognizable detail on the map image that also appears on the reference raster  
***<+-> e.g., in an ancient map of France, ''Lutetia'' corresponds to modern Paris  
***<+-> Use arrow keys to move and the mouse wheel to zoom, but clicking is disabled  
**<+-> Click when the crosshair is positioned over the reference detail (e.g., ''Lutetia'')  
**<+-> A window appears to input the coordinates  
**<+-> Click the !From Map Canvas! button  
**<+-> The map and dialog disappear, and you return to the OSM raster with a crosshair pointer  
**<+-> Locate the corresponding point (e.g., ''Paris'') on the raster and click  
**<+-> QGIS extracts the geographic coordinates from the raster  
**<+-> The map reappears with the coordinates filled in  
**<+-> Click OK and repeat for at least three points  

==== The map before georeferencing ====
\begin{center}  
<<<../images/QGis_georeference2.png, width=\textwidth>>>  
\end{center}

==== Running the Georeferencer ====
*<+-> Once all reference points are set, apply the georeferencing algorithm  
*<+-> Click the green triangle in the ''Georeferencer'' toolbar to start the process  
*<+-> A pop-up will confirm completion  
*<+-> Keep the Georeferencer window open and switch to the main QGIS window to inspect the result  

==== Inspecting the Result ====
*<+-> The image appears as a new raster layer in the main QGIS window  
*<+-> To assess the georeferencing accuracy, adjust transparency:  
**<+-> Right-click the new layer in the !Layers! panel and select !Properties! -> !Transparency!  
**<+-> Set !Global Opacity! to approximately 50% and click OK  
*<+-> The next slide illustrates an OSM raster of France with a georeferenced historical map of ancient tribes  
*<+-> The three reference points used: Paris, Marseille, and Bordeaux  
*<+-> Observe how the northern coastline differs between the maps  
*<+-> If the result is unsatisfactory:  
**<+-> Remove the layer  
**<+-> Return to the ''Georeferencer'' window to add more points  
**<+-> Repeat the georeferencing process  

==== Referenced image generated ====
\begin{center}  
<<<../images/QGis_georeference3.png, height=0.8\textheight>>>  
\end{center}

==== Use Your New Raster in QGIS ====
*<+-> During the georeferencing process, you specified a location to save the new raster  
*<+-> To load it in QGIS, open a new project and access the !Data Source Manager!  
**<+-> Select !Raster! as the data source type  
**<+-> Click !File! to choose the raster format  
**<+-> Browse your filesystem and set the !Source! field to the path of your new raster  

\begin{center}  
<<<../images/QGis_loadraster.png, height=0.8\textheight>>>  
\end{center}

==== More Resources ====  
*<+-> Find in-depth QGIS tutorials at \url{https://www.qgistutorials.com/en/}  
*<+-> Access geographic data (such as OpenStreetMap) from regional and global sources:  
**<+-> \url{https://earthexplorer.usgs.gov/} (Explore available ''datasets'')  
**<+-> \url{http://wms.pcn.minambiente.it/mattm/servizi-di-scaricamento/} for downloading ''WFS'' resources to import into QGIS  
*<+-> Try an engaging tutorial: \url{https://www.qgistutorials.com/en/docs/3/working_with_terrain.html}  
**<+-> Learn to add contour lines to QGIS maps  

